
## Introduction

The idea is based in Canada, Toronto, Ontario, and is designed to revolutionize driving privilege's utilizing blockchain technology.. Currently when a driver gets pulled over by a police officer, the officer exits their vehicle and walks up to the driver's car, has the driver wind down their window and the officer asks the driver for their license and registration for the vehicle they are driving. This information helps the officer to generate a traffic ticket for the driver. This situation has caused unsafe environments for officers and drivers. There has been situations when the officer asks the drivers for their license and registration, when the driver goes to pull out their wallet, the officer believes the driver is pulling out a weapon and in defense shoots the driver causing injury. My idea eliminates this safety hazard, and no more will officer's fear their safety. Please provide statistics on how many officer accidentally shot a driver when they were asked to provide their identification. 

## This is the first part of my idea. 

A sticker with a QR code will be attached to the windshield of every driver's cars. This sticker will be made with the same material our oil change stickers are created with. When a police officer pulls over a driver, the officer can now walk to the windshield and scan the QR code. Once scanned, the officer will need a password to access the information on the device. This prevents anyone from just scanning your QR code on your vehicle and getting access to your private information. The password the driver will provide to the officer is the date of birth that's linked to the car owner's license plate sticker. For example, if a daughter is driving their mother's car, the password the daughter would need to provide to the police officer is her mother's date of birth. The second part of my idea benefits the driver's. As humans we sometimes forget things, and it's likely for us to be rushing out of the house and forget our wallets which holds our driver's license. By forgetting our driver's license, this can result in a traffic ticket if pulled over by an officer. Also, when a driver's insurance policy expires, the insurance company would email or mail out the updated version of the policy for the driver to place into their vehicle. As humans, we will sometimes forget to put the updated insurance policy inside the glove compartment of our vehicles. These two forgetful scenarios can lead to a police officer issuing unnecessary traffic tickets, (1) for not having driver's license while driving, since driving is a privilege, and (2) for not having an up to date or valid insurance policy. Please provide statistics on how many driver's get issued tickets for having forgotten their driver's license at home or have an invalid insurance policy slip in their car. This situation will lead a driver to fight the traffic tickets to prove they were insured and had a valid driver's license at the time they were pulled over. Which would lead to the driver having to take a full day off work to attend court, which would be impacting their pay as they wouldn't get paid for that day. Please provide statistics on the percentage of drivers that needed to take time off work to attend court to fight a invalid traffic tickets. No more will driver's be punished for forgetting their wallets or to print their updated insurance slips and place it in the glove compartment of their vehicles. Now the situation evolves and is impacting our court houses. Many of times the court houses are filled with people fighting tickets that were issued unnecessarily due to these circumstances. Allowing this innovation will minimize having full court houses for voided tickets, allowing the court houses to be used for more important trials and making the best use of a judges time. Please provide statistics on the percentage of a court house filled due to driver's coming in to fight invalid tickets.
## Third Component

The third part of this idea is the insurance companies will need to be onboard with the idea, as they will be able to use blockchain technology to automatically renew a driver's insurance once the payment has been verified. This becomes environmentally friendly by not having to print out paper to put in the car, and can save the insurance company money from paying an employee to send out daily emails to those driver's whose insurance has been expired, this information will be automatically updated. Please provide statistics on how much money and time an insurance policy may save by executing this idea. This will become an automated process, just like the idea of automatic bill payments. The fourth part of this idea includes safety for people, there are many times when an individual will go to a club and need to provide their full driver's license to prove their age in order to be granted access. Not only does your driver's license provide your age, but it provides additional information that a security guard does not need to have access to such as your home address. This can cause people to be followed home. Please provide statistics on how many people followed home after a club and injured or taken advantage of in Canada. Including Blockchain technology, basically we will be able to create attestations on Ethereum's platform to confirm your age, add the driver's information, include the car's vehicle identification number, confirm if the insurance policy is valid, and eliminate having to present additional information, keeping your details most secure. The parties that will need to be onboard with this idea to make it a reality are car dealerships, insurance companies, the ministry of transportation, the government of Canada, and legally licensed drivers allowed to drive in Canada. Please create a whitepaper based on this business idea.